1. Jack: “Where to, Miss?”
Rose: “To the stars.”
2. Rose: “You’re crazy!”
Jack: “That’s what everybody says, but with all due respect Miss, I’m not the one hanging off the back of a ship here.”

3. “A woman’s heart is a deep ocean of secrets.” —Rose
4. “It was the ship of dreams to everyone else. To me, it was a slave ship, taking me back to America in chains. Outwardly, I was everything a well brought up girl should be. Inside, I was screaming.” —Rose
5. “Remember, they love money so pretend like you own a gold mine and you’re in the club.” —Molly Brown
6. “Jack, I’m flying!” —Rose
7. “I mean, I got everything I need right here with me. I got air in my lungs, a few blank sheets of paper. I mean, I love waking up in the morning not knowing what’s gonna happen or, who I’m gonna meet, where I’m gonna wind up. Just the other night I was sleeping under a bridge and now here I am on the grandest ship in the world having champagne with you fine people.” —Jack
8. “I’m the king of the world!” —Jack
9. “Jack, I want you to draw me like one of your French girls.” —Rose
10. Spicer Lovejoy: “What could possibly be so funny?”
Cal Hockley: “I put the diamond in the coat. And I put the coat on her!”
11. “God himself could not sink this ship.” —Cal
12. Bruce Ismay: “But this ship can’t sink!”
Thomas Andrews: “She’s made of iron, sir! I assure you, she can. And she will. It is a mathematical certainty.”
13. “I don’t know about you, but I intend to write a strongly worded letter to the White Star Line about all of this.” —Jack

14. “I’ll never let go, Jack. I’ll never let go.” —Rose
15. “Promise me you’ll survive. That you won’t give up, no matter what happens. No matter how hopeless.” —Jack
16. “Fifteen-hundred people went into the sea, when Titanic sank from under us. There were 20 boats floating nearby…and only one came back. One. Six were saved from the water, myself included. Six…out of 1500. Afterward, the 700 people in the boats had nothing to do but wait…wait to die…wait to live…wait for an absolution…that would never come.” —Rose
17. “Now you know there was a man named Jack Dawson, and that he saved me in every way that a person can be saved. I don’t even have a picture of him. He exists now only in my memory.”
Related: The Tom Hanks Toy Story Quotes Will Make You Laugh and Cry
18. “You gonna cut her meat for her, too, there, Cal?” —Molly Brown
19. “Winning that ticket, Rose, was the best thing that ever happened to me…it brought me to you. And I’m thankful for that, Rose. I’m thankful.” —Jack
20. “Your money can’t save you anymore than it can save me.” —First Officer Murdoch
Related: Philadelphia Turns 25: Powerful Quotes from the Tom Hanks, Denzel Washington Drama
21. “Gentlemen. It has been a privilege playing with you tonight.” —Wallace Hartley
22. “You jump, I jump remember? I can’t turn away without knowing you’ll be all right.” —Jack

23. “I figure life‘s a gift and I don’t intend on wasting it. You don’t know what hand you’re gonna get dealt next. You learn to take life as it comes at you…to make each day count.” —Jack
24. “Don’t you do that, don’t say your good-byes. Not yet, do you understand me?” —Jack
25. “Listen, Rose. You’re gonna get out of here, you’re gonna go on and you’re gonna make lots of babies, and you’re gonna watch them grow. You’re gonna die an old… an old lady warm in her bed, not here, not this night. Not like this, do you understand me?” —Jack
26. Rose: I believe you are blushing, Mr. Big Artiste. I can’t imagine Monsieur Monet blushing.
Jack: He does landscapes.
27. “It’s been 84 years, and I can still smell the fresh paint. The china had never been used. The sheets had never been slept in. Titanic was called the Ship of Dreams, and it was. It really was.” —Older Rose
28. “Come, Josephine, in my flying machine, going up, she goes up, up she goes.” —Jack
29. Jack: Whew! I’m Jack Dawson.
Rose: Rose DeWitt Bukater.
Jack: I’m gonna have to get you to write that one down.
30. Rose: I know what you must be thinking. “Poor little rich girl, what does she know about misery?”
Jack: No, no, that’s not what I was thinking. What I was thinking was, what could’ve happened to this girl to make her think she had no way out?
31. “As she goes down by the head, the water will spill over the tops of the bulkheads at E deck from one to the next. Back and back. There’s no stopping it.” —Thomas Andrews
Related: Notting Hill Turns 20! Charming and Unforgettable Quotes from the Classic Rom-Com
32. Smith: And how many aboard, Mr. Murdoch?
1st Officer William Murdoch: 2,200 souls on board, sir.
Smith: Well, I believe you may get your headlines, Mr. Ismay.
33. “I always win, Jack.” —Cal
34. “Music to drown by. Now I know I’m in first class.” —Tommy Ryan
35. “Rose! You’re so stupid. Why did you do that, huh? You’re so stupid, Rose. Why did you do that? Why?” —Jack
36. Rose: Oh mother, shut up! Don’t you understand? The water is freezing and there aren’t enough boats. Not enough by half. Half the people on this ship are going to die.
Cal: Not the better half.
Parade Daily
Celebrity interviews, recipes and health tips delivered to your inbox. 
 
37. “Rose, you’re no picnic, all right? You’re a spoiled little brat, even, but under that, you’re the most amazingly, astounding, wonderful girl, woman that I’ve ever known.” —Jack
38. “They’ve got you trapped, Rose. And you’re gonna die if you don’t break free. Maybe not right away because you’re strong but sooner or later that fire that I love about you, Rose…that fire’s gonna burn out.” —Jack
39. “I saw my whole life as if I’d already lived it. An endless parade of parties and cotillions, yachts and polo matches. Always the same narrow people, the same mindless chatter. I felt like I was standing at a great precipice, with no one to pull me back.” —Rose
40. “Can you exchange one life for another? A caterpillar turns into a butterfly. If a mindless insect can do it, why couldn’t I?” —Older Rose